---
layout: post
title: "Another Audio Pedal Project (aapp) > phase 0: DSP"
date: 2026-4-14
categories: [audio-pedal, devlog]
---

## Why DSP

Ever since I started using my first DAW, I've been curious about the computing power needed to run all those effects and plugins on the sound you're working with. 
I thought it would be interesting to dig a little deeper and understand the concepts behind these effects and plugins. 
So, what better project than an audio pipeline that mimics a pedal to see how everything comes together?
I still need to decide the direction of the project but the main idea is to develop the backend and then maybe adding some UI elements.

---

## phase 0: "Lets just start at zero; Level Zero".

*Getting mic input to come out of the speakers.*

---

## what I was trying to do

Phase 0 of my [audio effects pedal project](https://github.com/toita86/aapp)(The code is not public yet, but I will like to define a more long term plan first): 
- plug mic in, hear audio out, no effects. Just prove the plumbing works before I start building the actual thing.

## what actually happened

Installed `PyAudio`, wrote a scaffolding with the help of Claude and I was up and running the classic callback loop.

Running the python file and the output blessed my ears with a audio effect for crackling. Not quite what I was expecting but a start.

```python
def callback(in_data, frame_count, time_info, status):
    samples = np.frombuffer(in_data, dtype=np.float32)
    return (samples.tobytes(), pyaudio.paContinue)
```

Looked fine to me. Wasn't fine.

After some finicking I realized the issue: `np.frombuffer` returns a **read-only** array.
The moment a downstream effect tries to write to it instant *xrun*(fancy word for de-syncronization between software and hardware), instant crackle.
The fix is one word:

```python
samples = np.frombuffer(in_data, dtype=np.float32).copy()
```

`.copy()`. That's it of course.

The second issue was buffer size. I started with `CHUNK = 512` because I recalled using this to export audio files from my DAW. Turns out `256` is the sweet spot on my machine  small enough for
sub-6ms latency (my current laptop is not of the fastest).

```python
CHUNK = 256   # ~5.8ms @ 44100 Hz  tune this per machine
RATE  = 44100
```

## what I learned

Two things stuck with me:

1. **Never touch `in_data` directly** always `.copy()` before processing.

2. **Buffer size is a tradeoff, not a setting**, smaller = lower latency but more CPU
   pressure and more xrun risk. `256` works for me, might not work for you. Profiling is a matter with which I will like to deal later on.

## what's next

Phase 1 — biquad EQ. I've already downloaded the Audio EQ Cookbook PDF. Looks intimidating :')

---
*Part of my [aapp](https://github.com/toita86/aapp) project.*